/*

  The following documentation uses the Perl pod format. A html file
  can be constructed by: 

        pod2html --infile=dbug.pls --outfile=dbug.html

=pod

=head1 NAME

dbug_trigger - Perform debugging in Oracle PL/SQL triggers

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=cut

*/

-- =pod

create or replace package dbug_trigger is

  procedure print_all
  ( p_print_all in boolean default true
  );

  procedure process_dml
  ( p_table_name in dbug.module_name_t
  , p_inserting in boolean
  , p_updating in boolean
  , p_deleting in boolean
  , p_dml_finished in boolean default false
  );

  procedure enter(
    p_table_name in dbug.module_name_t
  , p_trigger_name in dbug.module_name_t
  , p_inserting in boolean
  , p_updating in boolean
  , p_deleting in boolean
  );

  procedure leave;

  procedure print(
    p_key in boolean
  , p_column_name in varchar2
  , p_old_value in number
  , p_new_value in number
  );

  procedure print(
    p_key in boolean
  , p_column_name in varchar2
  , p_old_value in varchar2
  , p_new_value in varchar2
  );

  procedure print(
    p_key in boolean
  , p_column_name in varchar2
  , p_old_value in date
  , p_new_value in date
  );

end dbug_trigger;

.

del 1 last

-- =cut

/*

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The I<dbug_trigger> package is used for debugging after row triggers as well
as statement triggers.

The I<dbug> package is used by I<dbug_trigger>.

=over 4

=item process_dml

Used to display information about the number of records processed in a DML
statement. Each after row dbug trigger will increment the number of records
processed. The after statement trigger will finalize the total number of
records. The procedure dbms_application_info.set_session_longops() is used to
show the information. This can be viewed for instance in Toad using the Long
Ops tab in the Session Browser.

=item enter

Enter a row trigger I<p_trigger_name> of table I<p_table_name>. The trigger
mode is specified by either I<p_inserting>, I<p_updating> or I<p_deleting>.

=item leave

Leave the row trigger. This must always be called if enter was called before,
even if an exception has been raised.

=item print

Print a line containing info about the column. The parameter I<p_key> denotes
whether the column is a key column. The parameter I<p_column_name> shows the
column name. Information is only printed in the following occasions: a non
null column while inserting; a changed value while updating or the key column
while deleting. The I<p_old_value> is only used when the trigger is updating
or when it is a key column in a deleting trigger. The I<new_value> is only
used for an inserting or updating trigger.

=back

=head1 NOTES

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head1 AUTHOR

Gert-Jan Paulissen

=head1 BUGS

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over 4

=item DBUG

See L<https://github.com/TransferWare/dbug>.

=item EPC

See L<https://github.com/TransferWare/plsdbug>.

=back

=cut

*/
